# Stewardship of the Standard Working Group

## 22nd October 2024

Attendees: Alex Tilley (Publish What You Fund), Bill Anderson, David Megginson (UN OCHA),  Elise Egan (USAID), Johan Zambrano (USAID), Mark Brough (Emergentally), Melina Lower (GIZ), Siem Vaessen (Zimmerman + IATI Governing Board), Sylvan Ridderinkhof (Zimmerman), Melis Karakus (Danish Refugee Council), Angelina Virchenko (UN Food and Agriculture Organization)

IATI Secretariat representatives: Steven Flower (Open Data Services), Bee Webb (Open Data Services), Rob Redpath (Open Data Services), Isabel Precious-Birds (Open Data Services), Cody Wallace (UNDP)

Apologies: Amy Guy (Open Data Services), Annelise Parr (UNDP), Ryan Boles (USAID), Joshua Satre (USAID),  Marcel Laqueur (FFO Germany)

Non attendees: Wakilongo Mweshwa Robert (AIGD AFRICA)

### Minutes 

#### Introductions and Recap

* [Recap](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1A8YI77gWSAwnbmRglQXiqa4yum4KqpIiI1xILKkEaG0/edit?usp=sharing) of objectives of the SSWG from Steven.
* Guiding questions have been shared in [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/IATI/standard-process/discussions).
* Today, group is to focus on guiding principles for standard changes.

#### Principles for change

* Discussed proposed principles for change based upon discussions on GitHub.
* The transparency of the process should also be an explicit principle.
* Broadening participation and outreach to affected groups is an important principle.
* Different types of changes - use case driven, technical/maintenance driven, changes mandated by changes to other standards. 

#### Principles for the Standard?

* Discussed proposed principles for the standard based upon discussions on GitHub.
* What is the role of the standard in the initiative and where do we want it to go?
* Noted that there is an opportunity to bring this into the 2025-2030 Strategic Planning process.
* Different meanings of "modularity" in the standard, and possible impact - complexity vs innovation.
* Noted that "splitting the standard up" away from the activity model (ie: into data modules) is not currently desirable or practical.
* Shared examples of extensions from the [Open Contracting standard](https://extensions.open-contracting.org/en/).
* Comparability - how comparable should IATI data be from different reporting organisations?

#### Responsibilities

* What roles and responsibilities should the various stakeholders have in the [change process](https://iatistandard.org/en/iati-standard/upgrades/how-we-manage-the-standard/)?
* [Example provided from GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/IATI/standard-process/discussions/2#discussioncomment-10777572), around how the Major, Minor & Patch mechanisms already imply roles and responsibilities that provide a sound basis for future improvement.
* Emphasis on pragmatism in terms of us all making changes in the most effective way - rather than be held up by over complicated process.
* Example from [360 Giving standard](https://www.threesixtygiving.org/data-standard/governance-of-the-data-standard/).
* How should change requests be received?
* Need to balance the process - checks and balances without burden. Transparency and good communication can mitigate this.

#### Translation

* How do we address accessibility of engaging with the change process, including but not limited to translation?
* Proposed changes should use short, non technical language as far as possible.
* Change summary one-pagers should be translated.
* Keep an eye on pragmaticism, too.

#### Guidance

* The guidance is separate from the standard and not currently change controlled. Should this be considered in our process?
* Noted that there is [guidance on normative and non-normative guidance](https://iatistandard.org/en/iati-standard/upgrades/guidance-updates/) already in place.
* Agreed on flexibility to change, and need to create shorter, clearer guidance that gives context.
* Also need for user guidance - if you use the data, this is what it means and how you should use it. For example, a standard way to split multi sector transactions.
* Agreed that guidance shouldn't try to be comprehensive or exhaustive but instead be pragmatic, for example describing common pitfalls when working with IATI data.

#### Next steps

* Group to continue collaborating in GitHub Discussions.
* Invite to next meeting (12 Nov) to follow.
* Secretariat to share examples of change proposals from the 360 Giving standard.
* Secretariat to ask OCP for their reflections on standard extensions.
