# Standard Stewardship Working Group meeting

## 12th November 2024

Attendees: Alex Tilley (Publish What You Fund), Angelina Virchenko (UN Food and Agriculture Organization), Bill Anderson, David Megginson (UN OCHA), Elise Egan (USAID), Mark Brough (Emergentally), Joshua Satre (USAID), Siem Vaessen (Zimmerman + IATI Governing Board), Sylvan Ridderinkhof (Zimmerman), Melis Karakus (Danish Refugee Council)

IATI Secretariat representatives: Steven Flower (Open Data Services), Bee Webb (Open Data Services), Rob Redpath (Open Data Services), Isabel Precious-Birds (Open Data Services), Cody Wallace (UNDP), Amy Guy (Open Data Services)

Apologies: Annelise Parr (UNDP), Ryan Boles (USAID),  Marcel Laqueur (FFO Germany), Johan Zambrano (USAID), Melina Lower (GIZ)

Non attendees: Wakilongo Mweshwa Robert (AIGD AFRICA)

### Minutes 

#### Recap of objectives and previous minutes

* [Recap](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1N6Xu8GZYte61yE5Gcpaty3rrrZXf_ho1mWmLOjIMPpI/edit?usp=sharing) of objectives of the SSWG from Steven.
* Previous minutes have been shared in [GitHub](https://github.com/IATI/standard-process/tree/main/meetings).
* Today is the final meeting of this time bound Standard Stewardship Working Group (SSWG).

#### Reflections on work so far

* Concern about short time to next board meeting and MA, and risk of not changing the standard for another year.
* Suggestion of small initial changes to the standard, to reintroduce the community to the concept of a changing data standard. 
* We have principles to work to from this group. 

#### Examples from other standards

Steven shared two examples of change control documents from other data standards,  [360 Giving](https://github.com/IATI/standard-process/discussions/10) and [Open Referral](https://github.com/IATI/standard-process/discussions/13).

* Agreement that similar templates for proposing changes would be useful for IATI.
* Need to ensure that this process includes communicating changes and their impact to data users.
* Idea - a requirement to "subscribe" to a IATI Standard Updates listserv in order to download IATI files or embed/use secretariat run APIs?
* A standard way of logging dependencies would be useful - i.e. which tools would be impacted by a change and how
* Suggestion of a standard update gazette.

#### Impact assessment

Amy presented a draft [impact-based upgrade approach](https://github.com/IATI/standard-process/discussions/12). This approach would be pragmatic, based on real-world impact rather than theoretical or hypothetical, and decouple the decision-making about changes to the standard from the Major/Minor/Patch definitions.

##### Questions for the SSWG

* Do these types of changes cover enough different scenarios?
* Does the process empower us to move the standard forward, whilst also being inclusive and accountable?
* Is the Secretariat responsible for triaging issues and setting a timeline, or should the Secretariat coordinate a working group open to the community/members to do this?
* What is the bar for proposing changes to the Board to sign off? (eg. demonstrated implementations, or something else?)

Reflections:

* The work of this group means we are in a good position process wise.
* There is work to be done on the governance side of standard changes.
* Would look to make changes that aren't substantive next year - they could be "major" but wouldn't have a major impact.
* Useful to batch changes together using this approach.

#### Github Discussion post: Putting users at the centre of the change process 

[Github discussion](https://github.com/IATI/standard-process/discussions/15) shared by David. 

Noting that it would be useful to have defined guidelines around consulting users about changes, and sharing the results of these consultations.

#### Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)

Recap of the relevant parts of the SOPs from Rob. We aren't in a place to propose changes to the SOPs yet.

Question: Can we ask to suspend the SOPs in this area to give flexibility to try new processes?

* Agreement that SOPs can be changed by members, but existing SOPs should be followed for now.
* We can work within the bounds of the SOPs, while experimenting with new processes for describing and evaluating the impact of changes.
* Secretariat should approach MA to communicate this work and plans, and to ask for goodwill to take this work forward. Board will then have oversight of the ongoing work.
* Would be useful to set forward a 6 month timetable of anticipated changes to inform the community and get wider engagement in the process.
* Emphasis on sharing the learning we have gained from this group.

#### Next steps

* Secretariat to prepare a change control template to share with the board and community.
* Group to continue collaborating in GitHub Discussions. Particular feedback is requested around the [impact-based upgrade approach](https://github.com/IATI/standard-process/discussions/12).
* Secretariat to promptly prepare a report on the SSWGs work, and share this on Github for feedback from the group.

Thanks to all members of the SSWG for their time and their valuable contributions to this ongoing work.