# Stewardship of the Standard Working Group

## 17 September 2024

Attendees: Siem Vaessen (Zimmerman + IATI Governing Board), Alex Tilley (Publish What You Fund), Melis Karakus (Danish Refugee Council), Sylvan Ridderinkhof (Zimmerman), Angelina Virchenko (UN Food and Agriculture Organization), David Megginson (UN OCHA), Melina Lower (GIZ), Ryan Boles (USAID), Elise Egan (USAID), Joshua Satre (USAID), Bill Anderson (Development Initiatives), Marcel Laqueur (FFO Germany)

IATI Secretariat representatives: Steven Flower (Open Data Services), Bee Webb (Open Data Services), Rob Redpath (Open Data Services), Amy Guy (Open Data Services), Isabel Precious-Birds (Open Data Services), Annelise Parr (UNDP) 

Apologies: Mark Brough (Emergentally), 

Non attendees: Wakilongo Mweshwa Robert (AIGD AFRICA)

### Minutes

#### Introduction and context

[Background information](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1logmF-5Hr5APJtY0bhb08-gc5UP1MAfgLs1-RHiLvhM/edit#slide=id.p1) about IATI standard governance from Steven.

* All [changes logged on iati site](https://iatistandard.org/en/iati-standard/upgrades/upgrade-changelogs/)
* Limited information on process for these changes https://iatistandard.org/en/iati-standard/upgrades/how-we-manage-the-standard/upgrade-process/ 
* Last major update (to 2.03) some processes were established in 2018, but have not been used - Patch, Minor, Major
* Group is to discuss these processes, are they appropriate, what do we need?

#### Purpose of this group

* [Terms of Reference](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L4tOQ2UhJAN87_qmUZZ8gx70qxCovXWc/view)
* Work together to make recommendations to the Governing Board on the _change process_ (not changes to the standard itself).
* Make sure we get input from a cross-section of users and understand how different users experience different changes. Timelines users have to act on changes. Evaluate positive and negative impact of changes.
* Changes to standard vs changes to the guidance.

#### Ways of working

* This group is for three months, with three meetings.
* Proposal to work via github discussions, in public.
* The group are happy for Secretariat representative (Steven) to chair and organise.

#### Current process

* Agreement that the standard comprises a collection of schema, codelists, documentation, and rules.
* Review of current change process as written, which hasn't been used since 2018.
* Lack of clarity about how some kinds of changes can/should be made, and what the Secretariat has the authority to do; how changes are initiated.
* Different people impacted differently by changes (what may seem small for one is not for another).
* How can we make 'major' upgrades less painful? Lack of appetite for them, with current process. A need for stability.
* Breaking changes worthwhile if it makes the standard more understandable and useable by more smaller orgs.

In breakout groups, we worked through three example needed changes and how we might approach them.

* Importance of communication and outreach with users and publishers.
* Likihood of pushback from publishers if changes have a big impact on them.
* Sharing clear benefit of changes.
* Prioritising data use needs or publisher needs.
* Meaning of a "major" change in practice.
* Changelogs and highlighting changes in documentation.
* Predictable release cycles for changes; time for input or concerns to be raised.
* The kinds of changes the Secretariat can take initiative on.

Further discussion on open questions will be useful:

* Whether there needs to be a standard for data for data use, as well as data publication.
* How much cleaning of data should tooling do for users?
* Use of extensions and components.

#### Next steps

* Github forum access etc will be shared.
* Secretariat will shared guiding questions and more examples, for discussion
* Invites to next meetings (22nd Oct & 12 Nov) to follow.
* Investigate whether to move the calls to Zoom platform (rather than Meet)
